\section{Grey Wolf Optimizer}
The Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO) aims to overcome key limitations in existing optimization algorithms, such as getting trapped in local optima, poor convergence behavior, and an imbalance between exploration and exploitation. While algorithms like Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA), and Differential Evolution (DE) have been successful in many scenarios, they often struggle with these issues. GWO addresses them by mimicking the social hierarchy and hunting strategies of grey wolves, leading to a more adaptive and balanced search process. The algorithm's structure, based on four types of wolves: alpha (α), beta (β), delta (δ), and omega (ω), enhances its ability to explore the search space globally and exploit promising regions effectively.\cite{mirjalili2014grey}

Limitations of Previous Approaches
The paper [1] highlights that metaheuristic techniques tend to outperform classical heuristics due to their simplicity, ability to avoid local optima, flexibility across different problem domains without structural changes, and their derivative-free approach that enables the process to begin from a random solution. Moreover, population-based algorithms have shown significant advantages over single-solution-based approaches.


GWO is a metaheuristic, population-based, swarm intelligence algorithm inspired by the social hierarchy and hunting behavior of grey wolves. However, many existing algorithms still face critical challenges. A major issue is local optima trapping, where the algorithm prematurely settles on suboptimal solutions. Another significant challenge is the lack of balance between exploration and exploitation, some algorithms overexploit early good solutions and fail to adequately explore the broader search space, especially due to their stochastic behavior. Furthermore, slow or improper convergence is also a limitation, as some algorithms struggle to efficiently reach high-quality solutions due to weak search strategies.These limitations have motivated the development of the GWO, which seeks to address these deficiencies through a more effective and biologically inspired approach. 

Introduction of the Novel Idea
Although many earlier swarm intelligence (SI) algorithms were inspired by natural hunting or search behaviors, they often overlooked the internal leadership dynamics within animal groups. The Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO) introduces a novel idea by simulating the leadership hierarchy and social behavior of grey wolves. It categorizes the population into four types of wolves,alpha (α), beta (β), delta (δ), and omega (ω), to represent the hierarchy of decision-making. The alpha wolf represents the current best solution, the beta and delta are the second and third best, while the remaining candidates are considered omega wolves.

The algorithm also mimics the three main phases of hunting: searching for prey, encircling prey, and attacking prey. These behaviors guide the population’s movement in the search space, with the alpha, beta, and delta wolves influencing the search direction. This structured yet dynamic mechanism allows the GWO algorithm to maintain a high degree of randomness and diversity, helping it to avoid local optima. \cite{kandasamy2020literature}

Demonstration of the New Approach
The new approach is demonstrated through benchmarking experiments on 29 test functions. Among these, 23 are classical benchmark functions, and the remaining 6 are composite benchmark functions. These functions are used to evaluate the algorithm’s performance in terms of exploration, exploitation, and local optima avoidance. Unimodal functions are used for exploitation analysis, multimodal functions for exploration analysis, and composite benchmark functions for local minima avoidance analysis. The algorithm was run 300 times for each benchmark, and statistical results (average and standard deviation) were compared to other popular swarm intelligence algorithms.   Additionally, the GWO algorithm is applied to three classical engineering design problems: tension design, welded beam design, and pressure vessel design. It was also tested on a real-world optical buffer design problem, running the algorithm 20 times to validate its ability to solve real-world problems with constraints. [3].

Results and Validation
The performance of GWO was validated through benchmarking against well-known optimization algorithms, such as PSO, GSA, and GA, across various test functions, including unimodal, multimodal, and composite functions. Statistically significant improvements were observed in key metrics such as Delay-Bandwidth Product (DBP) and Normalized DBP (NDBP), with GWO achieving a 93% improvement in bandwidth and a 65% improvement in NDBP compared to existing methods. Additionally, the algorithm was applied to a real-world optical buffer design problem, where it demonstrated superior performance.The results were validated through multiple runs to ensure consistency, and the algorithm was tested on a high-performance computing (HPC) cluster using multiple CPUs, validating its robustness in solving large-scale, complex problems.

Assessment of the Conclusions
The conclusions presented in the paper are generally well-supported by the experimental results. The authors demonstrate that GWO performs competitively against established optimization algorithms across a wide range of benchmark functions and real-world problems. The balance between exploration and exploitation is effectively illustrated, and the algorithm shows strong potential in avoiding local optima and achieving reliable convergence. However, while the findings are promising, broader testing on diverse problem domains would help further validate the general applicability of the approach. 


[1] S. Mirjalili, S. M. Mirjalili, and A. Lewis, "Grey Wolf Optimizer," School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Nathan Campus, Brisbane QLD 4111, Australia, Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Shahid Beheshti University, G.C. 1983963113, Tehran, Iran.

[2]P. Kandasamy, "Literature Review on Grey Wolf Optimization Techniques," International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1234-1238, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available: www.ijsr.net. [Accessed: Apr. 7, 2025].

[3] S. Mirjalili, S. Sarem, S. M. Mirjalili, and L. D. S. Coelho, "Multi-objective grey wolf optimizer: A novel algorithm for multi-criterion optimization," Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 47, pp. 106–119, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2015.10.039.
